hello hello everyone welcome to sorbon hello everyone welcome to sorbon talks I'm anujia I'm from the Stellar talks I'm anujia I'm from the Stellar development foundation and I'm super development foundation and I'm super excited to bring on our amazing sorbon excited to bring on our amazing sorbon developer Lee and our Deborah lead Tyler developer Lee and our Deborah lead Tyler onto stream hi everyone hi friends onto stream hi everyone hi friends all right so uh this is Lee's first time all right so uh this is Lee's first time on stream with me and also it's like my on stream with me and also it's like my second stream and we're considering second stream and we're considering making this into a stream a series of making this into a stream a series of some sort so if y'all want to do that some sort so if y'all want to do that let me know in the comments let me know in the comments um because I I would love to if y'all um because I would love to if y'all want to see me more on stream and Tyler want to see me more on stream and Tyler on stream we can all alternate Tyler on stream we can all alternate Tyler but um yeah hey everyone so we're gonna but um yeah hey everyone so we're gonna start off by playing a game of chrome start off by playing a game of chrome Dino I don't know Tyler have you ever Dino I don't know Tyler have you ever played Chrome Dino played Chrome Dino all the times that my internet goes down all the times that my internet goes down out here in the country out here in the country my score is still not very good but I do my score is still not very good but I do like a little Chrome Dino exactly so like a little Chrome Dino exactly so
like a little Chrome Dino exactly so we're gonna start off by competing with we're gonna start off by competing with Lee Tyler and myself and see who gets Lee Tyler and myself and see who gets the high score the high score um on Chrome Dyno and then we will jump um on Chrome Dyno and then we will jump right it's like ultimate beta switch right it's like ultimate beta switch we're gonna play Chrome dino games we're gonna play Chrome dino games you're actually sorry we're just gonna you're actually sorry we're just gonna start playing Chrome Dino and uh figure start playing Chrome Dino and uh figure out who's the best from Dino Champion out who's the best from Dino Champion it's Stellar all right so Tyler I'm it's Stellar all right so Tyler I'm gonna let you start first gonna let you start first um and we're gonna see how you do um and we're gonna see how you do oh my gosh we're not gonna do these oh my gosh we're not gonna do these concurrently all right here we go yeah concurrently all right here we go yeah we're gonna see who does we're all watching we're all watching okay in the meantime it's gonna soak up all in the meantime it's gonna soak up all five minutes here I'm gonna start five minutes here I'm gonna start getting my practice in I don't think getting my practice in I don't think it's gonna take all five minutes Tyler it's gonna take all five minutes Tyler you can't be that good you can't be that good I don't know my skills oh I don't know my skills oh but hey Kanye Nest conniness uh wrath is but hey Kanye Nest conniness uh wrath is in here there you go I'm using here and
hello hello feeling stressed watching hello feeling stressed watching this right that's I died there we go this right that's I died there we go right when Raph said feeling stressed right when Raph said feeling stressed watching this Tyler watching this Tyler you know all right Lee are you ready for you know all right Lee are you ready for this I'm ready so uh 3 55 3 55. okay all this I'm ready so uh 3 55 3 55. okay all right I'm frustrated there's two more right I'm frustrated there's two more zeros after that like people actually zeros after that like people actually are getting that high foreign to it the double jump uh speaker the double jump uh speaker busted busted Okay Tyler takes the eye I'm like I'm like we'll have good RAF are you gonna make we'll have good RAF are you gonna make us an nft for whoever uh us an nft for whoever uh his high score on this his high score on this all right here we go all right here we go wait why is it oh okay here's cactuses wait why is it oh okay here's cactuses it's not even fair you have to run like
it's not even fair you have to run like 100 feet before you even hit it all right all right all right we're all right we're getting there that additional like getting there that additional like twinkle sound whenever you jump over or twinkle sound whenever you jump over or I guess whenever you get like a hundred I guess whenever you get like a hundred or something or something it's very stressful okay better than Lee it's very stressful okay better than Lee I'm proud of that all right sweet so we could play another all right sweet so we could play another round or we could keep going I think we round or we could keep going I think we should just kick it off how do you feel should just kick it off how do you feel about that yeah let's get rolling all about that yeah let's get rolling all right so a couple different right so a couple different announcements uh while we get settled in announcements uh while we get settled in is basically today's stream will be is basically today's stream will be about about um one two things actually so we have an um one two things actually so we have an instant Dev environment set up for instant Dev environment set up for sorbon so if you're someone like me who sorbon so if you're someone like me who is basically never touched Russ till is basically never touched Russ till soroban started soroban started um and is just now getting started and um and is just now getting started and has come from like a web to like react has come from like a web to like react python background and you're like how do
python background and you're like how do I freaking get started on Russ well we I freaking get started on Russ well we have an answer for you rightly the get have an answer for you rightly the get pod answer so we're gonna share that pod answer so we're gonna share that today today um with all of you and do a couple um with all of you and do a couple different demos with it and this is your different demos with it and this is your chance to ask sorbon Dev Lee uh I keep chance to ask sorbon Dev Lee uh I keep saying that Lee I hope you're okay with saying that Lee I hope you're okay with me calling you the the Thor of on death me calling you the Thor of on death League League um but a q a with him uh I posted in our um but a q a with him uh I posted in our um Discord a link and I will share that um Discord a link and I will share that here as well but it's basically a link here as well but it's basically a link for you to for you to um put in your questions as you get them um put in your questions as you get them you're also more than welcome to share you're also more than welcome to share them on the stream uh we'll see this them on the stream uh we'll see this chat on stream as well chat on stream as well um so whatever works for you uh use it um so whatever works for you uh use it as you like and if you actually want to as you like and if you actually want to come on stream uh let me know in the come on stream uh let me know in the chat on the Discord which is the hashtag chat on the Discord which is the hashtag live chat live chat um which is the live chat Channel and I um which is the live chat Channel and I will uh DM you the link to join us on
will uh DM you the link to join us on stream actually and bring you on but stream actually and bring you on but that will be a bit later on straight so that will be a bit later on straight so I'll let Tyler kick it off I'll let Tyler kick it off um go on go on in super yeah so um as we um go on in super yeah so um as we mentioned last week I kind of uh dove mentioned last week I kind of uh dove into sort of on myself for the first into sort of on myself for the first time a couple weeks ago time a couple weeks ago um I I was very intimidated by it I was um I was very intimidated by it I was also very busy also very busy um and the the idea of trying to learn um and the idea of trying to learn uh rust was kind of like no thanks think uh rust was kind of like no thanks think I'll save that for later I'll save that for later um um but uh necessity kind of pushed itself but uh necessity kind of pushed itself you know okay where everybody's learning you know okay where everybody's learning sorobon now and this is kind of the sorobon now and this is kind of the thing that I've wanted ever since I thing that I've wanted ever since I found Stellar way way back and wanted to found Stellar way back and wanted to do something that Stellar didn't have an do something that Stellar didn't have an operation for operation for uh the ability to have a smart contract uh the ability to have a smart contract running uh behind a single Stellar running uh behind a single Stellar operation so we'll get into the operation so we'll get into the nitty-gritty of exactly what's going on nitty-gritty of exactly what's going on but I found it to be far far easier to but I found it to be far easier to kind of get up and running than I
kind of get up and running than I thought it would be most of these rust thought it would be most of these rust smart contracts are actually really smart contracts are actually really um small compact a lot of your um small compact a lot of your programming interfaces uh will actually programming interfaces uh will actually be on the front end which is typical of be on the front end which is typical of smart contract development smart contract development um so it's not that hard and now that um so it's not that hard and now that we've introduced the get pod thing so I we've introduced the get pod thing so I was like I was coming two weeks ago and was like I was coming two weeks ago and then I found get pod and oh my goodness then I found get pod and oh my goodness uh like you just you just click a link uh like you just click a link and you have a full rust sarobon and you have a full rust sarobon environment right inside your browser environment right inside your browser it's it's the it's the um vs code editor which is the one I use um vs code editor which is the one I use every day anyway every day anyway um which is amazing which is kind of um which is amazing which is kind of this call out to we're going to be doing this call out to we're going to be doing Stellar Quest anybody is familiar with Stellar Quest anybody is familiar with Stellar Quest our next Stellar Quest is Stellar Quest our next Stellar Quest is going to be a sarobon quest and it's going to be a sarobon quest and it's going to be all done right inside of a going to be all done right inside of a git POG so we're not a Kanye we're not git POG so we're not a Kanye we're not going to have to answer all of these um going to have to answer all of these um hey I'm using Windows and can't figure hey I'm using Windows and can't figure out how to install rust we're just going out how to install rust we're just going to focus on the sorobond pieces not on to focus on the sorobond pieces not on the environment rust future net
the environment rust future net configurations it's uh kind of compiling configurations it's uh kind of compiling all this into the quick wins of just all this into the quick wins of just figuring out getting our feet wet figuring out getting our feet wet um building out smart contracts so I am um building out smart contracts so I am going to bring my screen up and by me I going to bring my screen up and by me I mean a new here bring my screen up to mean a new here bring my screen up to um um introduce something that I think Lee you introduce something that I think Lee you added maybe last night inside of our added maybe last night inside of our Docs Docs if you go to any of these examples they if you go to any of these examples they now have an open in now have an open in get pod link get pod link which will open up all of these which will open up all of these different examples right inside the the different examples right inside the VM the get pod VM where you can run VM the get pod VM where you can run these examples right inside of our uh these examples right inside of our uh example soroban examples repo it opens example soroban examples repo it opens up that repo inside of a gitpod which is up that repo inside of a gitpod which is amazing uh we're not going to do that amazing uh we're not going to do that right off the bat though I'm going to right off the bat though I'm going to I'm going to open it up with we've got a I'm going to open it up with we've got a sort of on Pioneer Quest we're actually sort of on Pioneer Quest we're actually still building this out but I thought still building this out but I thought I'd go ahead and share this this is kind I'd go ahead and share this is kind of the idea is this is going to be a
of the idea is this is going to be a pretty big deviation from what we've pretty big deviation from what we've normally done with Stellar Quest where normally done with Stellar Quest where you're playing it with laboratory you're you're playing it with laboratory you're doing it in quest.stellar.org now you're doing it in quest.stellar.org now you're going to be doing the class right inside going to be doing the class right inside of a get pod which will be a little bit of a get pod which will be a little bit disorienting right especially for people disorienting right especially for people like nisho who get um very angsty and like nisho who get um very angsty and start clicking buttons when they don't start clicking buttons when they don't quite know what they do yet so this is quite know what they do yet so this is going to be allow you to kind of going to be allow you to kind of familiarize yourself with the familiarize yourself with the environment and that's we're going to environment and that's we're going to walk through today is this kind of get walk through today is this kind of get pod environment I'm going to walk you pod environment I'm going to walk you through through uh this is not going to I'm not going to uh this is not going to I'm not going to try very hard not to leak any of our try very hard not to leak any of our quests in this repo so the actual repos quests in this repo so the actual repos the secret repo good luck finding it the secret repo good luck finding it um but this particular one um but this particular one you can go ahead and find and open up you can go ahead and find and open up I'll be adding uh Elliot's writing some I'll be adding uh Elliot's writing some really good um readme material I think really good um readme material I think he's even going to do a video you'll get he's even going to do a video you'll get to see Elliot on screen that'll be fun to see Elliot on screen that'll be fun uh walking through the get pod so you'll uh walking through the get pod so you'll have no excuses to know exactly how to have no excuses to know exactly how to uh compete in the in the Stellar Quest
uh compete in the Stellar Quest whenever we get these these live whenever we get these live hopefully in November hopefully in November okay so if you click this open and get okay so if you click this open and get pod that's gonna launch your new get pod pod that's gonna launch your new get pod instance I've it takes a couple minutes instance I've it takes a couple minutes to uh spin one of these up not minutes to uh spin one of these up not minutes it takes a few seconds to spin one of it takes a few seconds to spin one of these up but depending on whether these up but depending on whether there's another pre-build running or there's another pre-build running or um what have you so I've already got one um what have you so I've already got one stood up here stood up here uh in my uh in my my browser here this is probably quite my browser here this is probably quite tiny so let me increase the size of that tiny so let me increase the size of that slightly slightly um so what you're seeing here basically um so what you're seeing here basically you've got a couple of different areas you've got a couple of different areas of navigation if you're familiar with of navigation if you're familiar with code editors IDs at all particularly vs code editors IDs at all particularly vs code this is going to at least not feel code this is going to at least not feel completely uh foreign to you but let me completely uh foreign to you but let me let me just go ahead and walk through a let me just go ahead and walk through a couple of these items and then we'll couple of these items and then we'll begin interacting with them begin interacting with them make sure to be keeping in Your Mind make sure to be keeping in Your Mind questions write those down in notes or questions write those down in notes or something or that type form that a something or that type form that a newfia sent out so we can answer those newfia sent out so we can answer those later on particularly ones that I won't later on particularly ones that I won't be able to answer because I am still a
be able to answer because I am still a newbie like everybody except for Lee newbie like everybody except for Lee um all right um all right so probably one of the most uh critical so probably one of the most uh critical pieces other than the actual code that pieces other than the actual code that we'll be looking through is your um bash we'll be looking through is your um bash terminal tab over here so I've actually terminal tab over here so I've actually got a futurenet that spins up with this got a futurenet that spins up with this get pod and so if you were to go to like get pod and so if you were to go to like the ports over here this little ports the ports over here this little ports tab you can open up tab you can open up this is actually delivering right from this is actually delivering right from inside this get pod you've got your inside this get pod you've got your futurenet we can see the latest ingested futurenet we can see the latest ingested Ledger uh one zero zero three one so uh Ledger uh one zero three one so uh we're syncing successfully with the we're syncing successfully with the future net that's amazing that all gets future net that's amazing that all gets configured for you configured for you um if you ever want to explore like okay um if you ever want to explore like okay that's fancy but it's a lot of magic that's fancy but it's a lot of magic inside of this git pod is the commands inside of this git pod is the commands that actually spin up these different um that actually spin up these different um terminals so you can see exactly what terminals so you can see exactly what commands are being run so this is how we commands are being run so this is how we actually run up that actually run up that um that Docker quick start saurabhand
um that Docker quick start saurabhand Dev Docker image so that's pretty that's Dev Docker image so that's pretty that's pretty cool pretty cool the other two things we've got going on the other two things we've got going on are this futurenet bash and a sandbox are this futurenet bash and a sandbox bash so these other two terminal Windows bash so these other two terminal Windows uh this first one is one will be we'll uh this first one is one will be we'll interact with both but this one the interact with both but this one the sandbox is kind of this safe local sandbox is kind of this safe local playground doesn't interact at all with playground doesn't interact at all with that future net that we have and then that future net that we have and then this this this futurenet one this one's connected with futurenet one this one's connected with environment variables uh attached right environment variables uh attached right into the um into the bash window with into the um into the bash window with all the environment variables we'll need all the environment variables we'll need to actually interact with this future to actually interact with this future net that we have running so you can see net that we have running so you can see these environment variables running on these environment variables running on this futurenet CLI so those get passed this futurenet CLI so those get passed into the environment on that bash so into the environment on that bash so um it's to try and help you if you um it's to try and help you if you accidentally like want to run a future accidentally like want to run a future net inside sandbox you'll just have to net inside sandbox you'll just have to pass these environment variables pass these environment variables yourself and if you want to run sandbox yourself and if you want to run sandbox in the future net you'd have to toss in the future net you'd have to toss those environment variables so if you
those environment variables so if you end up running into errors or issues end up running into errors or issues pass in them manually or pass in them manually or um um you can just look over here and try and you can just look over here and try and toggle back and forth every now and then toggle back and forth every now and then you will definitely get boogered and you will definitely get boogered and maybe just restart your git pod uh or maybe just restart your git pod uh or figure out the magic from inside of this figure out the magic from inside of this gitpod yaml file for the commands that gitpod yaml file for the commands that were actually run to spin those up were actually run to spin those up you can use zoom in a little bit you can use zoom in a little bit um into the screen not everyone is as um into the screen not everyone is as old as you are new here darn old as you are new here darn uh yes good good point uh yes good point um um there we go much better or even Kanye there we go much better or even Kanye can see it yep can see it yep um all right um all right so those are our terminal Windows we've so those are our terminal Windows we've only got three running up in here only got three running up in here um um let's go through uh we've talked about let's go through uh we've talked about the environments the the future net here the environments the future net here so this is the this is a quick start so this is the this is a quick start image that basically spins up your own image that basically spins up your own like Watcher node like Watcher node um but it's connected directly to the um but it's connected directly to the same future net that's running that you same future net that's running that you can like access in uh laboratory right
can like access in uh laboratory right now for example so things that we do now for example so things that we do inside the future net here will will inside the future net here will show up uh in like if we were to explore show up uh in like if we were to explore operations for a particular account operations for a particular account so that's all quite nice so that's all quite nice the main obvious thing that we're all the main obvious thing that we're all here to do though is to actually here to do though is to actually um build and test and run um build and test and run um contracts and this is where we start um contracts and this is where we start to touch a actual rust code I've only to touch a actual rust code I've only got one Quest up in here right now uh got one Quest up in here right now uh really to kind of emphasize just the really to kind of emphasize just the environment and learning that bit first environment and learning that bit first I just pulled the hello world example I just pulled the hello world example um from the example the soroban examples um from the example the soroban examples repository so that's the one that's repository so that's the one that's building up up here so if we run you building up here so if we run you could run cargo I guess uh make build but um for people I guess uh make build but um for people that are maybe unfamiliar with the make that are maybe unfamiliar with the make file it's basically if you're coming file it's basically if you're coming from the JavaScript world it's just like from the JavaScript world it's just like the scripts inside the package so it's the scripts inside the package so it's basically just going to run
basically just going to run this command I'm going to allow pastes because I'm I'm going to allow pastes because I'm not my own hacker um sweet so that was nice and quick less um sweet so that was nice and quick less than than um a half of a second um a half of a second and that'll put that built and that'll put that built wasm file so you write rust and then it wasm file so you write rust and then it compiles down to a wasm executable compiles down to a wasm executable that's the thing that you'll actually that's the thing that you'll actually deploy or run deploy or run on the contract so a lot of times when on the contract so a lot of times when you've got the sorobon CLI and you're you've got the sorobon CLI and you're calling something you'll be referencing calling something you'll be referencing this particular wasm file which Speaking this particular wasm file which Speaking of saurabhan you can we've got uh those installed the the we've got uh those installed the sorobon command if you're like okay well sorobon command if you're like okay well that's also magic how'd you install that that's also magic how'd you install that guy guy um Lee has built us a nice little Docker um Lee has built us a nice little Docker image image that pulls in the default uh get pod
that pulls in the default uh get pod Docker image loads up all the stuff we Docker image loads up all the stuff we need for that and then it installs need for that and then it installs things like sorobon and cargo hack and things like sorobon and cargo hack and some other things that we might need I'm some other things that we might need I'm actually working on a stellar Quest CLI actually working on a stellar Quest CLI um so the you can run all of your Stellar so the you can run all of your Stellar quests right from the command line I'll quests right from the command line I'll also install that as an executable also install that as an executable inside of this Docker file as well so inside of this Docker file as well so between the get pod and the gitpod between the get pod and the gitpod docker file most of the magic is docker file most of the magic is contained within there contained within there which is helpful to know which is helpful to know for the pro users out there so anyway for the pro users out there so anyway we've got our sort of on command line we've got our sort of on command line got loads of got loads of um nice sub commands to run here like um nice sub commands to run here like invoke inspect invoke inspect uh all those wonderful things let's go uh all those wonderful things let's go ahead and really quick so we went ahead ahead and really quick so we went ahead and uh we um bundled built the the and uh we um bundled built the contract so it exists you can see right contract so it exists you can see right here 13 lines of rust code here 13 lines of rust code to say things like hello something which
to say things like hello something which okay fair enough that's not that crazy okay fair enough that's not that crazy um but usually there isn't that much um but usually there isn't that much rust code to actually pull off some rust code to actually pull off some pretty complex logic like if you look at pretty complex logic like if you look at some of the I think we've even got an some of the I think we've even got an amm example in there we've got lots of amm example in there we've got lots of examples and I don't think any of them examples and I don't think any of them ever really start to cross Beyond like ever really start to cross Beyond like 200 300 lines of code most rust 200 300 lines of code most rust contracts are just very Compact and contracts are just very Compact and small and once you understand two things small and once you understand two things first first rust is actually rust is actually um um really like when you run things they'll really like when you run things they'll break but they often will tell you break but they often will tell you exactly what you did wrong exactly what you did wrong um but also a lot of the rust stuff um but also a lot of the rust stuff um is contained within the standard um is contained within the standard library and so a lot of the things you library and so a lot of the things you might need to learn or do would be might need to learn or do would be inside the standard library but we've inside the standard library but we've got this flag here that says no standard got this flag here that says no standard Library Library many times that will bite you if you're many times that will bite you if you're if you're very experienced in react uh if you're very experienced in react uh you're like where's all my strings and you're like where's all my strings and map hash maps and stuff map hash maps and stuff um um but where there is no standard Library but where there is no standard Library there's the sorobon SDK
there's the sorobon SDK um it's nice because if you're coming um it's nice because if you're coming from JavaScript and you're just trying from JavaScript and you're just trying to learn this thing there's actually to learn this thing there's actually less rust stuff you can do which keeps less rust stuff you can do which keeps that scope of things to learn quite that scope of things to learn quite minimal and keeps all of the minimal and keeps all of the documentation right inside of that documentation right inside of that sarabon.stellar.org forward slash docs sarabon.stellar.org forward slash docs all the things you need to know are kind all the things you need to know are kind of within that domain which is super of within that domain which is super nice nice um all right sweet so I'm going to see um all right sweet so I'm going to see if I can remember how to actually run if I can remember how to actually run this contract so we've got it built so this contract so we've got it built so we should be able to actually call it we should be able to actually call it I'm going to make sure I'm in my sandbox I'm going to make sure I'm in my sandbox CLI CLI and if I remember my homework we should and if I remember my homework we should be able to do sorobon invoke and be able to do sorobon invoke and whenever you get lost you can add that H whenever you get lost you can add that H flag and it will tell you the different flag and it will tell you the different options that you have available so we options that you have available so we are going to need a an ID and this uh are going to need a an ID and this uh wasm location and then if it's got wasm location and then if it's got although we need to call the specific although we need to call the specific function function and then any arguments that it might and then any arguments that it might contain contain if we were running it on the RPC we
if we were running it on the RPC we would either need to pass these flags or would either need to pass these flags or they will be pre-filled you'll notice if they will be pre-filled you'll notice if I run this exact same command soroban in Vogue help soroban in Vogue help um these sarobon are these RPC secrets um these sarobon are these RPC secrets are already filled in for us so that are already filled in for us so that we'll use those by default if we're we'll use those by default if we're using this particular using this particular um bash tab um bash tab which is nice which is nice okay okay so we got that so we got that let's go into we need an ID which we'll let's go into we need an ID which we'll just pass it one doesn't really matter just pass it one doesn't really matter because we're going to be calling it because we're going to be calling it locally right off of the target I'm at locally right off of the target I'm at root in my directory so I should just be root in my directory so I should just be able to go Target able to go Target so this is going to be our actual wasm so this is going to be our actual wasm file that we're targeting Target wasn't wasn't releases and I think the name of this releases and I think the name of this was soroban contract was soroban contract Blossom the argument
Blossom the argument I guess before we call our argument we I guess before we call our argument we need a function what function are we need a function what function are we going to call going to call the functions we have available to us the functions we have available to us are a big fat stack of one of them uh are a big fat stack of one of them uh and it's hello and as per tradition we will call the as per tradition we will call the argument with world and when we run that argument with world and when we run that we get the response just like it told us we get the response just like it told us it would print out the symbol hello and it would print out the symbol hello and then the two that we passed it which is then the two that we passed it which is also this symbol which is the argument also this symbol which is the argument that we included so we start with this that we included so we start with this default environment argument and the default environment argument and the second one is that argument that we second one is that argument that we passed and you could include other passed and you could include other arguments if you wanted but we just had arguments if you wanted but we just had this one world and then it's going to this one world and then it's going to print back this vector print back this vector hello world hello world fantastic that's amazing you might say fantastic that's amazing you might say but that's not actually a network but that's not actually a network fair enough let's see if we can copy the fair enough let's see if we can copy the same thing over to our future net same thing over to our future net brilliant okay so we before we can
brilliant okay so we before we can invoke though the function contract invoke though the function contract actually needs to exist on chain so actually needs to exist on chain so let's go ahead and deploy I think that's let's go ahead and deploy I think that's a command a command it is indeed um we need to deploy it with the wasm um we need to deploy it with the wasm file and I think that's basically all we file and I think that's basically all we have to do because our secret key RPC have to do because our secret key RPC nodes Network passphrases are already nodes Network passphrases are already filled in for us so deploy filled in for us so deploy Verizon from the target 1132 release 1132 release Urban Urban that's going to deploy that straight on that's going to deploy that straight on to our future net to our future net uh amazing so this is our uh contract uh amazing so this is our uh contract hash so if we wanted to go and invoke hash so if we wanted to go and invoke I'm going to do the I'm going to do the crazy thing of just copying this moving crazy thing of just copying this moving it over to our future net it over to our future net and the only thing we need to change and the only thing we need to change here assume that rebuilt a good futurenet assume that rebuilt a good futurenet he honestly didn't build the future now
he honestly didn't build the future now there's lots of people involved there's lots of people involved you also want to remove the uh the you also want to remove the uh the wasn't I need to remove the wasn't this is what I need to remove the wasn't this is what this is yep this is yep passing an actual ID passing an actual ID we don't need that we should send that straight over to the we should send that straight over to the Future net and we get Hello World back Future net and we get Hello World back now I know like many of you you're now I know like many of you you're thinking well that's fancy thinking well that's fancy show it to me in laboratory well I can't show it to me in laboratory well I can't actually run this in laboratory yet but actually run this in laboratory yet but what I can do uh is show you the what I can do uh is show you the operation that we just committed operation that we just committed and I'm going to do that by committing and I'm going to do that by committing the cardinal sin the cardinal sin of looking up that secret key that I use of looking up that secret key that I use so let's actually let's do something a so let's actually let's do something a little bit different let's generate a Brand New Key pair on let's generate a Brand New Key pair on futurenet which all of them are the same futurenet which all of them are the same so let's just paint that I'm going to so let's just paint that I'm going to write this down in the notes that I have write this down in the notes that I have over here so I don't forget it
right sweet so now we're going to go and we're sweet so now we're going to go and we're going to deploy this again going to deploy this again this time we're going to use a new this time we're going to use a new secret key secret key that one that we just included so that I that one that we just included so that I don't have to commit the Cardinals in don't have to commit the Cardinals in deriving a public key from the secret deriving a public key from the secret key on stream key on stream which I did just generate a key on which I did just generate a key on screen but that's fine it's a test net screen but that's fine it's a test net whatever okay so we committed that whatever okay so we committed that submitted that so if we right now if we submitted that so if we right now if we went and looked up our explore endpoints went and looked up our explore endpoints operations for account and we just order this by descending and we just order this by descending we're going to notice that brand new we're going to notice that brand new operation invoke host function that's operation invoke host function that's really the only operation that classic really the only operation that classic Stellar has kind of added and it's um Stellar has kind of added and it's um very cryptic and hard to understand very cryptic and hard to understand which is why we have Lee here let's go which is why we have Lee here let's go ahead and call another one ahead and call another one so we did the deploy now we can do the invoke now we can do the invoke got a new contract ID so let's put that
got a new contract ID so let's put that in in unless we pass our new put that right here new secret key there's nothing fancy with the secret there's nothing fancy with the secret key it's just a stellar thing you're key it's just a stellar thing you're just signing the transaction that you're just signing the transaction that you're going to submit to the Future net going to submit to the Future net uh but rather than having to like submit uh but rather than having to like submit an xdr or something you can just pass in an xdr or something you can just pass in the secret key as an argument and it the secret key as an argument and it will do all of the signing and will do all of the signing and submitting submitting um for you so there we go we got our um for you so there we go we got our hello world back and if we run this hello world back and if we run this again we should see two again we should see two host invoke host functions so that was host invoke host functions so that was the one that actually built the or uh the one that actually built the or uh submitted the contract submitted the contract create contract with Source account is create contract with Source account is the function and this one is host the function and this one is host function host function invoke contract function host function invoke contract uh but again uh Wicked uh but again uh Wicked um obfuscated behind the Allure of what um obfuscated behind the Allure of what in the world does this xdr actually have
in the world does this xdr actually have behind it behind it so that's kind of where my demo ends so that's kind of where my demo ends this is like to me this is again kind of this is like to me this is again kind of mind-blowing where you can build these mind-blowing where you can build these things relatively quickly and easily things relatively quickly and easily whether it's on futurenet and actually whether it's on futurenet and actually able to explore it inside of horizon or able to explore it inside of horizon or in your sandbox right we could just go in your sandbox right we could just go in here and do a public function that in here and do a public function that reads something or maybe it saves some reads something or maybe it saves some data all those other examples that we data all those other examples that we were showing but were showing but like it's actually pretty simple to like it's actually pretty simple to write a contract and then deploy it run write a contract and then deploy it run it and see it in laboratory just like it and see it in laboratory just like you would do with anything else you you would do with anything else you might do with Stellar the only might do with Stellar the only difference is what we had before was difference is what we had before was here's an operation that is make a here's an operation that is make a payment okay but I want to do something payment okay but I want to do something fancy too bad you can make a payment fancy too bad you can make a payment with this operation now we have an with this operation now we have an operation that is invoke smart contract operation that is invoke smart contract which does whatever the heck you want to which does whatever the heck you want to inside of whatever the functions are inside of whatever the functions are behind the contract that was uploaded so behind the contract that was uploaded so it's like this um do whatever you want it's like this um do whatever you want operation uh in stellar and my goodness operation uh in stellar and my goodness I've wanted that for a long time and to I've wanted that for a long time and to actually see it working and it's kind of
actually see it working and it's kind of simple and you've got this nice git pod simple and you've got this nice git pod environment to do all this stuff environment to do all this stuff I don't know about you but I think I'm I don't know about you but I think I'm going to quit working for SDF and start going to quit working for SDF and start writing smart contracts because this writing smart contracts because this this I haven't been this excited about this I haven't been this excited about actually building on Stellar since I actually building on Stellar since I found Stellar way back in 2014. this is found Stellar way back in 2014. this is amazing and and amazing and again like you're discovering Stellar again like you're discovering Stellar for the first time in 2014 like okay for the first time in 2014 like okay sweet I think at the time there's like sweet I think at the time there's like 12 things you could do with stellar and 12 things you could do with stellar and then now there's like 22 or something then now there's like 22 or something now there's an infinite number of things now there's an infinite number of things you can do with stellar and that is you can do with stellar and that is incredible like I was super excited incredible like I was super excited before just finding stellar before just finding stellar now I mean this is this is this is now I mean this is something else and something else and um I don't know I'm I can't wait to um I don't know I'm I can't wait to start writing like nft weird nft smart start writing like nft weird nft smart contracts all that stuff that I was contracts all that stuff that I was trying to do with Stellar turrets that trying to do with Stellar turrets that was very difficult and lots of Hoops to was very difficult and lots of Hoops to jump through jump through um now now this is this I can't wait to um now this is this I can't wait to just start writing weird contracts my just start writing weird contracts my mind is it's been hard to shut down mind is it's been hard to shut down um for all the crazy things I want to do
um for all the crazy things I want to do um I might have to create a pseudonym um I might have to create a pseudonym for Sora bonathon so I can uh try and for Sora bonathon so I can uh try and swoop in on some of those prizes uh okay swoop in on some of those prizes uh okay enough with me talking enough with me talking you should show um before you before you you should show um before you take it away you should show you how take it away you should show you how easy it is to write tests yeah easy it is to write tests yeah I have no idea how to write a test I've I have no idea how to write a test I've never written a rest test in my life so never written a rest test in my life so maybe uh is there what's in the test maybe uh is there what's in the test file is that this one right here file is that this one right here yes this is a real real simple test yes this is a real simple test that's just calling that hello function that's just calling that hello function exactly the same way that you invoked on exactly the same way that you invoked on the command line and there's a little the command line and there's a little tiny text at the top of the function run tiny text at the top of the function run test if you click that test if you click that click the run test click the run test it's going to run it here in your it's going to run it here in your browser browser so you can individually run like when so you can individually run like when you're running the entire test like is you're running the entire test like is this now individually taking that this now individually taking that component and running a test on it component and running a test on it please okay yeah exactly is that what please okay yeah exactly is that what this mod test thing is how does it link
this mod test thing is how does it link between the list between the list in the test file in the test file uh the mod test is just telling the uh the mod test is just telling the project that project that oh no what's going on here oh no what's going on here um he's just telling the compiler that um he's just telling the compiler that that other test rust file should be that other test rust file should be included because included because that all the rust files are not included that all the rust files are not included by default they'll have to be referenced by default they'll have to be referenced from that that lib from that lib um um and it looks like we got some sort of and it looks like we got some sort of bug in our GitHub setup bug in our GitHub setup if you if you run a cargo clean Tyler and then just try clicking that run test and then just try clicking that run test again no debug it live no debug it live is this like the most satisfying thing is this like the most satisfying thing of giffpod I feel I mean it's satisfying of giffpod I feel I mean it's satisfying anytime to watch anything compiled but anytime to watch anything compiled but this is really satisfying this is really satisfying This thing always gives me anxiety This thing always gives me anxiety because it's like yes I've waited for 30 because it's like yes I've waited for 30 seconds to get to 142 and then I'll be
seconds to get to 142 and then I'll be an error and like oh shoot now I gotta an error and like oh shoot now I gotta fix that and then wait another five fix that and then wait another five yeah there's a lot of dependencies yeah there's a lot of dependencies because this what this test is doing is because this what this test is doing is there's only what like five six lines of there's only what like five six lines of code here code here um but that M default that's at the um but that M default that's at the beginning of the test is actually the beginning of the test is actually the sorbent environment and it's not uh a sorbent environment and it's not uh a mock environment it's the actual cyberon mock environment it's the actual cyberon environment that gets embedded in the environment that gets embedded in the Stellar core nodes and we're using it Stellar core nodes and we're using it here in the test so when you're writing here in the test so when you're writing rust tests here uh in your contract you rust tests here uh in your contract you are actually testing your contract are actually testing your contract um in much the same way that it will be um in much the same way that it will be running on chain uh so you have all the running on chain uh so you have all the same things available to you uh you can same things available to you uh you can even do things like integration tests even do things like integration tests across other contracts so you can import across other contracts so you can import another contract that you're calling or another contract that you're calling or maybe several contracts you're calling maybe several contracts you're calling and you can write tests using your and you can write tests using your contract and all of those contracts contract and all of those contracts together and you know see for real together and you know see for real how it's actually going to behave well how it's actually going to behave well that's so cool that's is that that's one
that's so cool that's is that that's one of the advantages of having like the of the advantages of having like the entire thing be being written in Rust entire thing be being written in Rust where you get this rust environment that where you get this rust environment that can be like pulled out of actually can be like pulled out of actually running it in core but it's the actual running it in core but it's the actual environment that is running in core environment that is running in core exactly exactly yay our test passed yay our test passed all of that for one test okay it needs all of that for one test okay it needs to be like capital okay I found this to be like capital okay I found this yeah it's like okay with an exclamation yeah it's like okay with an exclamation um but that could also mean it's not um but that could also mean it's not okay but haha no anyone okay but haha no anyone um anyways uh lee there's a fun question um anyways uh lee there's a fun question which is is this a smart contract to which is this a smart contract to find out what these Halloween costume find out what these Halloween costume will be this year will be this year yeah I'm gonna I'm gonna dress up as yeah I'm gonna dress up as hello Dev hello Dev it's not a bad idea yeah we're gonna have to have a little yeah we're gonna have to have a little bit smarter contract very very smart bit smarter contract very smart smart guess well at least Halloween costumes guess well at least Halloween costumes right right but Tyler so you wanted to ask Lee some
but Tyler so you wanted to ask Lee some questions I believe yeah so questions I believe yeah so one of like my main question is I'm even one of like my main question is I'm even as I'm writing Stiller Quest quests one as I'm writing Stiller Quest quests one of the things I'm gonna have to do is of the things I'm gonna have to do is okay okay um people are doing their quests they um people are doing their quests they they do their hello world like one of they do their hello world like one of the first quests the spoiler alert might the first quests the spoiler alert might be to call be to call um hello world um hello world um I know I can find um I know I can find that they did that that they did that but I don't know how to prove that in but I don't know how to prove that in this that they actually submitted hello this that they actually submitted hello world and I'm guessing it's something to world and I'm guessing it's something to do with one of these parameters do with one of these parameters um maybe something with the footprint um maybe something with the footprint can you just like walk us through a can you just like walk us through a am I going to be able to do like build a am I going to be able to do like build a stellar Quest off of the data that I'm stellar Quest off of the data that I'm getting inside of the operations to getting inside of the operations to check if what someone submitted was what check if what someone submitted was what I expected I expected because this xdr is not immediately because this xdr is not immediately helpful to me and then secondarily to helpful to me and then secondarily to that the heck is a footprint that the heck is a footprint yeah these are good questions can you
yeah these are good questions can you can you zoom in a little bit I'm sorry can you zoom in a little bit I'm sorry it's pretty it's pretty pretty small uh for me um the yeah we've pretty small uh for me um the yeah we've got got three Fields here and uh you're right three Fields here and uh you're right they don't really tell us a whole lot on they don't really tell us a whole lot on the surface there's two tools we can use the surface there's two tools we can use to understand like what to understand like what this mumble jumble this mumble jumble um words are we can either use the um words are we can either use the laboratory uh whenever you've got in laboratory uh whenever you've got in future net mode so if you want to open future net mode so if you want to open that up in another tab we can try that up in another tab we can try putting that into into the laboratory putting that into the laboratory you can also use the Sovereign CLI it you can also use the Sovereign CLI it also has a sub command where you can also has a sub command where you can just paste this and it would print out just paste this and it would print out this is what the value is this is what the value is um um but maybe we can use the laboratory a but maybe we can use the laboratory a lot of people so yeah this is this is lot of people so yeah this is laboratory right here do you want me to laboratory right here do you want me to copy one of these xdr values over to the copy one of these xdr values over to the view xdr yes okay so I just copied view xdr yes okay so I just copied this one with type object object this one with type object yeah so what you want to do is grab the yeah so what you want to do is grab the XTL type it should be SC Val if you look
XTL type it should be SC Val if you look for SC Val it'll be down there deep in for SC Val it'll be down there deep in the and okay it's not actually rendering and okay it's not actually rendering something that's super useful here something that's super useful here that's well I mean I mean maybe that's that's well I mean maybe that's that's b64 yeah base64 decode that b64 yeah base64 decode that XYZ is a is a does this convert to okay wait you're singing strange URLs okay waiter oh no what is the what is this waiter oh no what is the what is this Valley Valley we should have started with the second we should have started with the second dude I don't remember okay we can start dude I don't remember okay we can start with the second time do the second one with the second time do the second one first I'm gonna try to see if I can first I'm gonna try to see if I can remember what remember what the first one is and why we can't decode the first one is and why we can't decode it oh the first one's the contract ID it oh the first one's the contract ID oh so it's a hack or the contract oh so it's a hack or the contract function or something like that so let
function or something like that so let me let me uh run my super powerful other me let me uh run my super powerful other VM called run kit and do buffer VM called run kit and do buffer um a64 and then two string a64 and then two string it's probably a hexia that's our contract ID Maybe that's our contract ID Maybe ish [Music] wish that was wish that was that was not uh that was the actual xdr that was not uh that was the actual xdr value this was the value this was the a64d so that's our contract hash right there so that's our contract hash right there all right so that's uh one problem all right so that's uh one problem solved now we need um this one solved now we need um this one Sim yes let's have a look at what that is View xdr
versus also an sc value this is also an versus also an sc value this is also an essay file so if you copy that Sim value essay file so if you copy that Sim value and stick it into the base64 decoder it and stick it into the base64 decoder it should that should come out as a string should that should come out as a string all right without the hex hello sick all right what's uh wait that was our wait that was our that was our first argument right by that was our first argument right by default oh that was the output no no default oh that was the output no no that's the input that's the function that's the input that's the function name the parameter was the contract ID name the parameter was the contract ID the second parameter was the function the second parameter was the function we're calling and then all the we're calling and then all the parameters after that are should be the parameters after that are should be the arguments arguments fingers crossed everybody wait I gotta gotta turn it out of the wait I gotta turn it out of the xdr into xdr into a64. 864 will it say World question mark I can write my checks
I can write my checks haha everyone you'll have to actually do haha everyone you'll have to actually do what the challenge says or you're busted what the challenge says or you're busted amazing and is it almost always so when amazing and is it almost always so when I look at view xdr this thing just got I look at view xdr this thing just got absolutely enormous absolutely enormous are there many other things that people are there many other things that people will need to be aware of or is SC Val will need to be aware of or is SC Val kind of cover most of our ground here kind of cover most of our ground here scal covers any any value that that's scal covers any value that that's being used as like an input or an output being used as like an input or an output or unlike of a contract function as well or unlike of a contract function as well as anything that's being stored so if as anything that's being stored so if you're storing something on chain some you're storing something on chain some data to look up again later maybe light data to look up again later maybe light balances things like that they're all balances things like that they're all ultimately going to be stored inside our ultimately going to be stored inside our cval and SC value is really a union of cval and SC value is really a union of lots of other types so here we can see lots of other types so here we can see this RC valve is a symbol there are this RC valve is a symbol there are integers there's like byte arrays Maps integers there's like byte arrays Maps vectors vectors um um begins they all fall under that scale
begins they all fall under that scale I spent too long trying to figure out I spent too long trying to figure out how to decode this and I just how to decode this and I just just had to get on stream that's all I just had to get on stream that's all I had to do had to do that makes a ton of sense all right that makes a ton of sense all right fantastic well now I know how to bust fantastic well now I know how to bust everybody for passing the arguments and everybody for passing the arguments and making sure they actually submit the making sure they actually submit the right thing right thing next the heck is a footprint this is next the heck is a footprint this is also an xdr also an xdr is this I really hope it has something is this I really hope it has something to do with Bigfoot but I'm guessing it to do with Bigfoot but I'm guessing it doesn't you can try decoding that if you doesn't you can try decoding that if you want I don't remember what the type is want I don't remember what the type is exactly it's probably The Ledger exactly it's probably The Ledger footprint is the type um there's a contract ID and this this is there's a contract ID and this is not necessarily particularly interesting not necessarily particularly interesting uh for this specific contract because uh for this specific contract because this contract doesn't access any data or this contract doesn't access any data or anything like that so what well anything like that so what well footprint is is footprint is um it's us telling uh the runtime uh um it's us telling uh the runtime uh what data the contract May write to or
what data the contract May write to or read from read from and the reason this exists is because uh and the reason this exists is because uh we don't uh we want the runtime to know we don't uh we want the runtime to know what data might the contract will need what data might the contract will need to be accessing because that helps us do to be accessing because that helps us do things like run contracts uh things like run contracts uh concurrently at the same time concurrently at the same time so so um we're building sarban with the um we're building sarban with the advantage that we've we've seen other advantage that we've seen other blockchains already build blockchains already build um you know smart contract runtimes and um you know smart contract runtimes and we know that scaling uh blockchains is we know that scaling uh blockchains is um is difficult and so we're planning um is difficult and so we're planning that from the get-go with Saruman and that from the get-go with Saruman and one of the foot the footprint is like one of the foot the footprint is like part of the the idea is that when you part of the idea is that when you invoke a contract you define what data invoke a contract you define what data might need to be accessed by the might need to be accessed by the contract and then the runtime knows how contract and then the runtime knows how to paralyze contracts that don't need to to paralyze contracts that don't need to access or write to the same data access or write to the same data so in this contract invocation so in this contract invocation if we looked at the code you'd say it's if we looked at the code you'd say it's not accessing any data so why is there
not accessing any data so why is there there's one entry here there's one there's one entry here there's one read-only entry the contract data and read-only entry the contract data and the key is not particularly the key is not particularly descriptive it's a static descriptive it's a static IC and what that is is the contract code IC and what that is the contract code itself so we're saying that with this itself so we're saying that with this contractification the only contract data contractification the only contract data it needs to read or write is the actual it needs to read or write is the actual contract code that gets loaded into the contract code that gets loaded into the runtime but if you were writing if you had a but if you were writing if you had a contract where you were updating a contract where you were updating a balance uh you would need to include The balance uh you would need to include The Ledger key in this footprint for the Ledger key in this footprint for the balance that was planned to be updated I think that's making sense I think that's making sense I know they're so yeah I know they're so yeah there's a question here so what is the there's a question here so what is the footprint of a function that uses an footprint of a function that uses an environment invoke contract environment invoke contract all right all right yeah that's a good question uh it should yeah that's a good question uh it should be it'll be the footprint of whatever be it'll be the footprint of whatever that other contract requires so at the
that other contract requires so at the very least it's going to require the very least it's going to require the contract code so there'll be like contract code so there'll be like another entry like what we see here on another entry like what we see here on screen except the contract ID won't be screen except the contract ID won't be uh the calling contractor will be the uh the calling contractor will be the contract that's going to be called and contract that's going to be called and then if that contract needs to go and then if that contract needs to go and access any data uh you would also need access any data uh you would also need to being pre-included you need to be to being pre-included you need to be predetermining what data is going to be predetermining what data is going to be accessed and including that in the accessed and including that in the football football is there a limit to like the depth that is there a limit to like the depth that that can go before it becomes difficult that can go before it becomes difficult I mean there will be limits for I mean there will be limits for um the runtime especially like once it um the runtime especially like once it gets to pubnet I think we're still gets to pubnet I think we're still figuring out a lot of what those you figuring out a lot of what those you know those levers should be set up uh so know those levers should be set up uh so for future net I mean future net doesn't for future net I mean future net doesn't have fees enabled either so have fees enabled either so um you know these are things which we're um you know these are things which we're building out and they'll they'll be in building out and they'll be in future future future future net iterations future net iterations yeah I think a question that maybe yeah I think a question that maybe arises uh from this is you know I said
arises uh from this is you know I said that the footprint is something that you that the footprint is something that you have to predetermine you as the person have to predetermine you as the person building the transaction here to go and building the transaction here to go and figure out what the footprint should be figure out what the footprint should be and that maybe can be a bit of a and that maybe can be a bit of a daunting task and so daunting task and so um we have this thing called pre-flight um we have this thing called pre-flight or simulation where you can submit a or simulation where you can submit a transaction without the footprint so no transaction without the footprint so no food required and it's not executed on food required and it's not executed on chain it's just it's simulated and then chain it's just it's simulated and then you get back it basically gives you back you get back it basically gives you back the footprint so you can then just go the footprint so you can then just go and submit the transaction with that and submit the transaction with that footprint footprint so you don't really have to determine it so you don't really have to determine it yourself I know when I was looking at yourself I know when I was looking at the network requests inside of the network requests inside of um um uh Paul's example dap there was loads of uh Paul's example dap there was loads of those preflights whenever something was those preflights whenever something was happening to go and find what the actual happening to go and find what the actual submission call should look like and submission call should look like and it's also the way that you do it's also the way that you do um read requests so if you're if you um read requests so if you're if you don't actually need to submit something don't actually need to submit something networking you just need to get data out networking you just need to get data out of the network you can use those of the network you can use those pre-flight requests to um grab
pre-flight requests to um grab information from The Ledger from The information from The Ledger from The Horizon endpoint without actually having Horizon endpoint without actually having to submit the transaction to submit the transaction which I thought was kind of kind of cool which I thought was kind of cool there are a few other questions here it there are a few other questions here it says like why have one type of uh SC says like why have one type of uh SC value for everything architecture-wise value for everything architecture-wise question mark um that's a good question I think uh the um that's a good question I think uh the values get used in a lot of places where values get used in a lot of places where um you know like as function inputs um you know like as function inputs function outputs and we really need one function outputs and we really need one type uh that's going to contain all type uh that's going to contain all those other types those other types um yeah that's what I got that flavor of yeah that's what I got that flavor of design really comes from like the way design really comes from like the way that xdr like the the Stella Network that xdr like the Stella Network uses xdr for structuring uses xdr for structuring um all of the data they get stored and um all of the data they get stored and uh that's just a really common way of uh that's just a really common way of solving that problem in the XTR
[Music] um um I'm trying to see there are a few other I'm trying to see there are a few other questions here uh that I guess we can questions here uh that I guess we can shift a little bit but uh it says how shift a little bit but uh it says how should one think when writing Forum on should one think when writing Forum on contracts that involves not mucking up contracts that involves not mucking up keep it small and apparently write good keep it small and apparently write good tests because I made it a long way and tests because I made it a long way and then I had to write a test and it broke then I had to write a test and it broke so so Rico tests Rico tests um start out really small I don't know have fun right right now I don't know have fun right now it's like on futurenet so play around it's like on futurenet so play around learn what you're doing learn what you're doing um but yeah Nisha you'll figure it out I believe in you do the Stellar Quest I believe in you do the Stellar Quest that'll that'll go a long way sorbonne that'll go a long way sorbonne Quest you mean Stellar requests saravan Quest you mean Stellar requests saravan quest Quest version series quest Quest version series um I do have another question um I do have another question and this is particularly coming from a and this is particularly coming from a JavaScript engineer perspective
JavaScript engineer perspective is is there a way to like watch is there a way to like watch contracts so that as you make changes it contracts so that as you make changes it kind of runs tests and compiles in like kind of runs tests and compiles in like as you save files or is that something as you save files or is that something you have to like always be building you have to like always be building always be testing always be testing is the idea that you just kind of Click is the idea that you just kind of Click run test every time you update some code run test every time you update some code sort of thing you you fix your tests you sort of thing you fix your tests you write your code you run tests again write your code you run tests again what's the what's the development flow what's the development flow tend to be when making changes tend to be when making changes yeah I mean there's a couple of options yeah I mean there's a couple of options here it really comes down to you know here it really comes down to you know what you like to do uh if you're a vs what you like to do uh if you're a vs code user there should be code user there should be um my shortcut codes are customized so I um my shortcut codes are customized so I won't say what it is because I don't won't say what it is because I don't know what the default is but there's a know what the default is but there's a shortcut code you can press shortcut code you can press um to run the last test or run the test um to run the last test or run the test under your current cursor and so a under your current cursor and so a common development flow is you just keep common development flow is you just keep hitting that key after you've made some
hitting that key after you've made some changes and it'll go run the tests you changes and it'll go run the tests you care about in that moment there's care about in that moment there's another great tool called cargo watch another great tool called cargo watch which you can it may actually be which you can it may actually be installed in this GitHub I think I think installed in this GitHub I think if I saw it was installed in the docker if I saw it was installed in the docker file and if you use cargo watch file and if you use cargo watch by default it probably just builds and by default it probably just builds and that may not that may not be where we want but if you be where we want but if you um I think it's like cargo watch space um I think it's like cargo watch space Dash X space test and that will just run Dash X space test and that will just run the tests every time you change the the tests every time you change the files cool yeah so this I think by default it cool yeah so this I think by default it just right just builds and then tests yeah that makes sense yeah that makes sense and I will definitely help it's just a and I will definitely help it's just a very foreign environment very foreign environment but it's not a poor one it's just a very but it's not a poor one it's just a very foreign environment for a JavaScript foreign environment for a JavaScript developer so knowing what that narrative developer so knowing what that narrative is like for actively working on a is like for actively working on a contract contract um is an important one um is an important one um
that was just a link that I wanted to that was just a link that I wanted to share well I guess Kanye West wanted to share well I guess Kanye West wanted to share yeah if there are Rush developers share yeah if there are Rush developers in the chat that have the ways that they in the chat that have the ways that they run these a submit it to the run these a submit it to the sorobonathon because I need to know how sorobonathon because I need to know how to build these faster and uh and B put to build these faster and uh and B put those in in chat with links and such those in chat with links and such yeah it's one of the things I love about yeah it's one of the things I love about the rust Community is it's very aware of the rust Community is it's very aware of how hard it is to learn rust and so how hard it is to learn rust and so people are very eager to share all the people are very eager to share all the things that they do and the tips and things that they do and the tips and tricks they have for getting up to speed tricks they have for getting up to speed and actually building contracts and and actually building contracts and stuff um yes so uh you can yeah you can write yes so uh you can yeah you can write unit tests but you can also write unit tests but you can also write integration tests in the sense that if integration tests in the sense that if your contract is using other other your contract is using other contracts contracts um you can download those contracts at um you can download those contracts at the moment you just you have to manually the moment you just you have to manually download them as a DOT wasn't file in download them as a DOT wasn't file in
download them as a DOT wasn't file in the future you know hopefully we'll have the future you know hopefully we'll have some like better mechanics around that some like better mechanics around that where they can just be automatically where they can just be automatically downloaded but uh yeah you report that downloaded but uh yeah you report that wasn't file you can register that wasn't file you can register that contract in your test so it's there contract in your test so it's there registered in the environment just as if registered in the environment just as if it had been deployed on chain and then it had been deployed on chain and then your your contract when you're running your contract when you're running its tests can be calling through to it its tests can be calling through to it so you don't have to be you don't have so you don't have to be you don't have to set up mocks you don't have to set up to set up mocks you don't have to set up you know these fake tests with your if you know these fake tests with your if you're you're contractors interacting with all these contractors interacting with all these other other um other things and um other things and we don't have this implemented today but we don't have this implemented today but um the environment can have data um the environment can have data pre-loaded into it that environment that pre-loaded into it that environment that we saw in the tests and so we do want to we saw in the tests and so we do want to build toolings to to do things like take build toolings to do things like take data that's on chain like if you know data that's on chain like if you know you basically take like a specific you basically take like a specific Ledger and then you could write tests Ledger and then you could write tests that actually use that actually use contracts that are actually that have contracts that are actually that have been actually deployed as well as data
been actually deployed as well as data that's been actually that actually that's been actually that actually existed on let on The Ledger at that existed on let on The Ledger at that point in time point in time so so there's another question that came in there's another question that came in through the through the um Forum yearly which says when you um Forum yearly which says when you execute a contract who provides the execute a contract who provides the computing power to process the function computing power to process the function normally when I write a function and run normally when I write a function and run it it's my PC or server I arrange that's it it's my PC or server I arrange that's burning some CPU Cycles how does that burning some CPU Cycles how does that work with colorbox work with colorbox is the question like during testing or is the question like during testing or do you mean like when the contract is do you mean like when the contract is actually running actually running I feel like they are probably referring I feel like they are probably referring to when the contract is running to when the contract is running execute yeah when Tyler like deployed execute yeah when Tyler like deployed the contract on chain he uploaded he the contract on chain he uploaded he uploaded all of that the code onto not uploaded all of that the code onto not the compiled version of the contract the compiled version of the contract onto the chain and then when he invoked onto the chain and then when he invoked it he was giving the contract he was it he was giving the contract he was giving he was telling the chain like go giving he was telling the chain like go and run this code so the code is running and run this code so the code is running on all of the nodes of the network and on all of the nodes of the network and the nodes are all agreeing on like this
the nodes are all agreeing on like this is the outcome of running that that is the outcome of running that contract got it got it um decentralization um decentralization there are one more question that came in there are one more question that came in here which says here which says um how sorbon adopted zero knowledge um how sorbon adopted zero knowledge grouping soroban supports yeah I think we're like very interested yeah I think we're like very interested I think in in supporting like I think in supporting like different uh crypto Primitives and different uh crypto Primitives and um if you go and have a look in the the um if you go and have a look in the Discord you know with there have been Discord you know with there have been some conversations around like what some conversations around like what crypto Primitives should we be crypto Primitives should we be supporting you know how for supporting supporting you know how for supporting things like that things like that um right now the only crypto Primitives um right now the only crypto Primitives implemented is available uh implemented is available uh in the sorbin SDK are just the really in the sorbin SDK are just the really basic ones that you would typically see basic ones that you would typically see in the Stellar ecosystem today things in the Stellar ecosystem today things like shell 256 and add 25519 keys but
like shell 256 and add 25519 keys but we're definitely very interested in we're definitely very interested in finding out like you know what people finding out like you know what people want or see that they need and we have want or see that they need and we have ideas about what can be added and you ideas about what can be added and you know we'll definitely be looking into know we'll definitely be looking into that yep that yep see I think that is about all the see I think that is about all the questions that there are anyone else questions that there are anyone else have any final questions here have any final questions here I'd be curiously as you kind of have a I'd be curiously as you kind of have a really broad knowledge of sorobon where really broad knowledge of sorobon where it's going and you're working with it's going and you're working with internal and external teams on road maps internal and external teams on road maps and and are there things you'd really like to are there things you'd really like to see people work on or provide feedback see people work on or provide feedback for or what's kind of the most exciting for or what's kind of the most exciting thing that comes across your desk as far thing that comes across your desk as far as Community engagement or things that as Community engagement or things that people are doing or maybe areas of people are doing or maybe areas of opportunity that you feel like people opportunity that you feel like people maybe aren't quite recognizing yet that maybe aren't quite recognizing yet that you'd like to ensure that people are you'd like to ensure that people are aware of aware of and like what would you like to see come and like what would you like to see come through sarbanathon through sarbanathon yeah I think yeah I think um definitely the big ticket thing is um definitely the big ticket thing is writing contracts like getting more
writing contracts like getting more people writing contracts providing people writing contracts providing feedback around uh what they've found uh feedback around uh what they've found uh convenient or inconvenient around what convenient or inconvenient around what they have found they have found um to be uh you know conceptually made um to be uh you know conceptually made sense you know they wanted to do X and sense you know they wanted to do X and the SDK helped them to do xor or didn't the SDK helped them to do xor or didn't help them to do that or got in their way help them to do that or got in their way we def like that that's I think probably we def like that that's I think probably the biggest thing is is dog fooding the biggest thing is dog fooding um writing contracts and discovering um writing contracts and discovering what's missing what the gaps are all what's missing what the gaps are all that sort of stuff that's what uh really that sort of stuff that's what uh really interests me and I've seen like a lot of interests me and I've seen like a lot of good posts on this sorry I can't even good posts on this sorry I can't even say this sorry bethon um that have been very interesting and and that have been very interesting and you know people exploring how does you know people exploring how does authentication work authentication work um and ex providing examples of where it um and ex providing examples of where it works really well where it's you know works really well where it's you know got some rough edges and and like that's got some rough edges and like that's fantastic because that gives us that's fantastic because that gives us all as a community the opportunity to
all as a community the opportunity to figure out what needs to change between figure out what needs to change between now where we're at right now future now now where we're at right now future now version one what needs to change between version one what needs to change between now and getting to test now and pub now now and getting to test now and pub now down the road down the road yeah absolutely we actually had that yeah absolutely we actually had that exact uh example come through uh this exact uh example come through uh this week I believe uh there you go wow Raph week I believe uh there you go wow Raph is already on it uh like sharing the is already on it uh like sharing the links to it but yeah no definitely like links to it but yeah no definitely like I think we wanna the whole reason for I think we wanna the whole reason for sore monathon to exist is like simply to sore monathon to exist is like simply to help with the development and like dog help with the development and like dog fooding sorbon to like the ecosystem and fooding sorbon to like the ecosystem and then to let our Dev team then to let our Dev team um know how can they actually take it um know how can they actually take it and improve Sargon right like we're and improve Sargon right like we're listening basically listening basically um I see another question here which um I see another question here which says oh uh yeah um I think Connie Nets says oh uh yeah um I think Connie Nets you have the right answer there uh where you have the right answer there uh where it is would SCF allow the next round is it is would SCF allow the next round is lower Bond related projects lower Bond related projects um that's probably like a it I would say um that's probably like a it I would say yes probably but don't quote me on that yes probably but don't quote me on that um but yeah I'd say well we'll support
um but yeah I'd say well we'll support once once it hits mainnet because the once it hits mainnet because the point of SCF is point of SCF is um to run live businesses uh kind of in um to run live businesses uh kind of in production and if you're please don't production and if you're please don't run a production level business on a run a production level business on a test net or a futurenet so be working on test net or a futurenet so be working on your business ideas now you can't just your business ideas now you can't just spin up a business in a month some of spin up a business in a month some of you probably could you probably could um so that there's like get started get um so that there's like get started get ready so that whenever there isn't a CF ready so that whenever there isn't a CF round that is accepting round that is accepting um because they're that are built on top um because they're that are built on top of Sarah bonathon sorobon wow it's not of Sarah bonathon sorobon wow it's not called sarobon anymore now it's just called sarobon anymore now it's just Sarah bonathon Sarah bonathon um um how the tables turn uh then we'll how the tables turn uh then we'll be ready to accept those those inbounds be ready to accept those inbounds but it's definitely coming but it's definitely coming um we just want to encourage people um we just want to encourage people building businesses on top of building businesses on top of test Nets that said I would love to test Nets that said I would love to potentially we were just at like since potentially we were just at like since this is like uh I consider this like a this is like uh I consider this like a very casual conversation with our very casual conversation with our community but we're considering maybe community but we're considering maybe doing like a hackathon in the future by
doing like a hackathon in the future by Future I mean like next month Future I mean like next month um or the month after uh where basically um or the month after uh where basically it would be for you to come up with it would be for you to come up with those ideas you can submit proposal sore those ideas you can submit proposal sore Bond related ideas and like do example Bond related ideas and like do example contracts and so on and so forth so we'd contracts and so on and so forth so we'd really like to see you like we don't really like to see you like we don't want to stop you from ideating at the want to stop you from ideating at the moment so if you had ideas please start moment so if you had ideas please start working on them because there will come working on them because there will come a time when we want those ideas uh a time when we want those ideas uh brought to us uh from the community we brought to us uh from the community we want to support you the best way we can want to support you the best way we can so yeah yeah and I'd say we'll probably so yeah and I'd say we'll probably like surabana Thon is sort of bonathon like surabana Thon is sort of bonathon First Light we're gonna run more right First Light we're gonna run more right the next one will be sorobanathon the next one will be sorobanathon super tools or something where where super tools or something where we're coming up with like a new theme we're coming up with like a new theme new new funding round looking for a new funding round looking for a different type of content and one of different type of content and one of those might be some of the tooling that those might be some of the tooling that that we really want to to see on the that we really want to see on the network some of that like opens Upland network some of that like opens Upland type contracts as the as the platform type contracts as the platform continues to mature and change less
continues to mature and change less um it'll become safer I guess to begin um it'll become safer I guess to begin writing more of these mature uh writing more of these mature uh production ready contracts but we've got production ready contracts but we've got to be careful in the sequencing of to be careful in the sequencing of things that we don't write contracts things that we don't write contracts that are just going to be constantly that are just going to be constantly breaking or make it kind of breaking or make it kind of disincentivize an environment from disincentivize an environment from breaking things in order to improve the breaking things in order to improve the final product so you want to keep things final product so you want to keep things a little platoy in uh in the first in a little platoy in uh in the first in the first early stages so that so that the first early stages so that it's fine to constantly be breaking it's fine to constantly be breaking things because nobody's built anything things because nobody's built anything to mature yet the pub net is the takeaway here I guess the pub net is the takeaway here I guess um but yeah I think that is everything um but yeah I think that is everything for this week y'all once again Sarah for this week y'all once again Sarah bonathon is still a thing it's happening bonathon is still a thing it's happening it's going to keep happening and keep it's going to keep happening and keep playing when tinkering with sarmon like playing when tinkering with sarmon like you literally can earn excellent for you literally can earn excellent for doing that I don't know why you aren't doing that I don't know why you aren't like I said I'm always ready to quit my like I said I'm always ready to quit my job and start working on sarban but job and start working on sarban but um I do like my job I like talking about
um I do like my job I like talking about it it but yeah anyways y'all thank you all for but yeah anyways y'all thank you all for joining uh we will be back next week um joining uh we will be back next week um on Friday with senso actually talking on Friday with senso actually talking about his assembly script SDK so stay about his assembly script SDK so stay tuned for more details on that uh we're tuned for more details on that uh we're really excited and that's always a good really excited and that's always a good time to just ask questions uh in general time to just ask questions uh in general about sarban well that's sarban thanks about sarban well that's sarban thanks that's a wrap on store Bond talks yeah that's a wrap on store Bond talks yeah thank you thanks a bunch see ya new here thank you thanks a bunch see ya new here Lee